feat: Add validation infrastructure and review skills (v3) (#183)
Big-Life-Lab/cchsflow: ceps/cep-015-variable-tools/cep-015-variable-tools.qmd

| Status  | Draft                                |
| Branch  | skills/review-validation             |
:::

## Abstract

This CEP specifies tools that help researchers and AI agents find, select, and use harmonised CCHS variables from cchsflow. The current cchsflow workflow assumes users know which variables they need and how to call `rec_with_table()`. In practice, users need to:

1.  Discover which harmonised variables are available for their research question
2.  Understand dependency chains — derived variables require feeder variables
3.  Check cycle and database coverage for their target population
4.  Generate project-specific worksheets with only the variables they need

These tools complement the existing *producer-side* infrastructure (authoring, review, validation skills) with *consumer-side* capabilities.

## Motivation

### The dependency problem

A researcher requesting `pack_years_der` implicitly needs 9+ feeder variables, some of which are themselves derived. Today, this dependency chain is encoded in `variableStart` fields using `DerivedVar::[feeder1, feeder2, ...]` notation, but there is no programmatic way to resolve the full transitive closure.

> If any feeder is missing from the project worksheet, `rec_with_table()` fails silently or produces unexpected results. This is the single most common source of user error.

Reviewer: `rec_with_table` gives warnings when it can't derive a variable because of missing feeder vars. For example `BMI could not be derived because height and weight was never specified nor is it a function variable therefore it was not recoded`. Here's the relevant code https://github.com/Big-Life-Lab/cchsflow/blob/main/R/recode-with-table.R#L863-L871. 

The documentation may not be clear on that....

### The coverage problem

> Not all variables are available for all cycles or database types. A researcher planning a 2001-2023 trend analysis needs to know that `age_start_smoking` has no PUMF source for 2022-2023, or that PUMF pack-years have \~15-20% relative error versus Master. This information exists in worksheet metadata but requires manual inspection.

Reviewer: This text `PUMF pack-years have \~15-20% relative error versus Master` is not a coverage problem but a limitation that users should be aware of when choosing that variable. Recommend moving it to a new section.

### The project worksheet problem

`rec_with_table()` processes all variables in the worksheets. For large projects, this is slow and produces many irrelevant variables. Users need a way to generate minimal project-specific worksheets containing only their target variables and transitive dependencies.

## Existing work

### Within cchsflow

-   **`R/variable-discovery.R`** — metadata queries (`get_harmonized_variables()`, `get_source_mappings()`, `find_variable_in_data()`), recommended variable tags, subject/section filtering. Currently v1, smoking-focused.
-   **`recommended` metadata tag** — `{recommended:primary}` / `{recommended:secondary}` in the `notes` field of `variables.csv`. Started for smoking but not applied broadly.

> -   **`R/table-generators.R`** — generates summary tables (cycle coverage, variable counts). Primarily for documentation, not user-facing.

Reviewer: This file is missing

### Within cchsflow (runtime)

-   **`recode_derived_variables()`** in `R/recode-with-table.R` (lines 820-966) — the existing runtime dependency resolver. Parses `DerivedVar::[...]` from `variableStart`, extracts feeders, detects circular dependencies via a `var_stack`, and recurses to resolve missing feeders. Tightly coupled to the recoding pipeline — cannot be called standalone for metadata queries.

### In downstream projects

> Three big-life-lab repositories have independently implemented variable selection and dependency resolution. These are the primary consumers that CEP-015 aims to consolidate.

Reviewer: I don't see how any of the resources mentioned here implement variable selection. If I understand correctly from this CEP, variable selection would mean tools that would help a researcher choose the variables that would help them answer a research questions. All the tools in this sections are used to help with the dependency problem mentioned above.

**MockData** (`v030-refactor` branch) — cleaner, modular implementation:

-   `R/mockdata-parsers.R` — `parse_variable_start(variable_start, cycle)` handles 4 formats (db-prefixed, bracket, default, plain; returns NULL for DerivedVar). `parse_range_notation()` for recStart/recEnd parsing.
-   `R/mockdata-helpers.R` — `get_cycle_variables()`, `get_raw_variables()`, `get_variable_details_for_raw()` for per-cycle variable resolution.
-   `R/identify_derived_vars.R` — `identify_derived_vars()` pattern detection + `get_raw_var_dependencies()` non-recursive feeder extraction.

**huipain** — simplest pattern: calls `recodeflow::rec_with_table()` per cycle with full cchsflow worksheets copied as-is. No custom dependency resolution.

### External

-   **cchs-metadata MCP** — provides StatCan source metadata (16,000+ variables, 251 datasets) but does not know about cchsflow harmonisation logic (dependency chains, recoding rules).

## Evaluation

> Requirements were scored against seven criteria. The current project context: 381 variables, 3,698 variable_details rows, 225 DerivedVar entries, 17 recommended tags (smoking only), \~2,900 CRAN downloads/year, 7+ downstream repositories within big-life-lab (bllflow, cvd-trends-Canada, phiat-yll, raiflow, huipain, chmsflow, calibrationTutorial).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requirements were scored against seven criteria. The current project context: 381 variables, 3,698 variable details rows, 225 derived variables entries, 17 recommended tags (smoking only), \~2,900 CRAN downloads/year, 7+ downstream repositories within big-life-lab (bllflow, cvd-trends-Canada, phiat-yll, raiflow, huipain, chmsflow, calibrationTutorial).
```

> Requirements were scored against seven criteria. The current project context: 381 variables, 3,698 variable_details rows, 225 DerivedVar entries, 17 recommended tags (smoking only), \~2,900 CRAN downloads/year, 7+ downstream repositories within big-life-lab (bllflow, cvd-trends-Canada, phiat-yll, raiflow, huipain, chmsflow, calibrationTutorial).

Reviewer: Recommend adding a description for each criteria in the table.

> | Req | Value | Success | Complexity | Maintenance | User proximity | Incremental | Alternative today |

Reviewer: I would rename this column from Req (Requirement) to Feature since it lists things that we're considering building as opposed to a requirement which is something that has to be built. This change also has downstream effects that will need to addressed.

> | Req | Value | Success | Complexity | Maintenance | User proximity | Incremental | Alternative today |

Reviewer: Recommend renaming the Incremental column to Dependencies since for all the features except R5 its documenting what else has to be completed. For R5 its documenting content that should be moved to the Value column.

|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|

> | R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 DerivedVars; silent failures are #1 user error; 5+ downstream projects affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 derived variables; silent failures are #1 user error; All current and future projects are affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |
```

> | R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 DerivedVars; silent failures are #1 user error; 5+ downstream projects affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |

Reviewer: See this comment for silent failure https://github.com/Big-Life-Lab/cchsflow/pull/183/changes#r3209057941

> | R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 DerivedVars; silent failures are #1 user error; 5+ downstream projects affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |

Reviewer: `parse_variable_start` does the bare minimum for this feature. It would mainly need `get_dependency_tree`.

> | R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 DerivedVars; silent failures are #1 user error; 5+ downstream projects affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |

Reviewer: Not sure what you mean by `PUMF/Master Split`.

> | R1: Dependencies | **High** — 225 DerivedVars; silent failures are #1 user error; 5+ downstream projects affected | **High** — deterministic; `parse_variable_start()` exists | Medium — recursive resolution, cycle detection, PUMF/Master splits; \~200-300 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | **High** — directly prevents most common failure | Yes | Read CEP docs; trial and error |

Reviewer: Can you explain how reading the CEP docs is the alternative today? I thought you would have to go through the worksheets and trace through the dependency tree.

I'd be interested in also hearing how somebody does it with `trial and error` since there are so many variables.

| R2: Coverage | Medium — useful for trend analyses, but `databaseStart` is human-readable | **High** — straightforward CSV cross-reference | Low — \~100-150 lines | **Zero** — reads existing worksheets | Medium — researchers can read `databaseStart` directly | Yes | Manual inspection of `databaseStart` |

> | R3: Project worksheets | **High** — 5+ downstream projects independently maintain subset scripts | **High** — CSV subsetting is well-defined; depends on R1 | Low-Medium — \~150 lines | Low — output format matches existing worksheets | **High** — produces an artifact they directly use | Needs R1 | Copy full worksheets, delete rows manually |

Reviewer: I would say the  complexity is Low since the brunt of the work is in R1.

> | R4: Discovery | Low-Medium — incremental over existing `get_harmonized_variables()` | **High** — extending existing functions | Low — \~50-100 additional lines | Low — reads worksheets | Medium — helps new users; experienced users know their variables | Yes | `grep` on variables.csv |

Reviewer: My sense is that the requirements section for each feature should come before the evaluation section. The table itself does not really go over what's involved in each feature, that is documented in the Requirements section. This became clear to me with the R4 feature. Recommend formatting the document so that the Requirements section comes before the Evaluation section.

> | R4: Discovery | Low-Medium — incremental over existing `get_harmonized_variables()` | **High** — extending existing functions | Low — \~50-100 additional lines | Low — reads worksheets | Medium — helps new users; experienced users know their variables | Yes | `grep` on variables.csv |

Reviewer: For the Alternative today content, power users would use some programmatic method like grep. For the majority of users it's probably opening the file in Excel and filtering.

> | R5: Recommended sets | **Low** — requires domain expertise for curation; 17 tags across 381 vars; bundles are project-specific | Medium — code is easy; curation is hard; who maintains definitions? | Low (code), **High** (curation) | **High** — bundles go stale as variables are added per CEP | Low-Medium — researchers define their own lists | Yes, but low value without broad tag coverage | Project-specific variable lists |

Reviewer: For the Value cell, agree with the Low however only the `bundles are project-specific` make sense to me. `requires domain expertise for curation` seem more like a Success or Complexity argument, `17 tags across 381 vars` also seems like a Complexity argument.

> | R6: MCP/CLI | Medium — serves AI agents, not humans directly | Medium — cross-repo coordination; scope boundary unclear | Medium-High — Python wrappers or reimplementation | Medium — two repos must stay in sync | Low (humans), High (AI agents) | Needs R1-R3 | AI agents read worksheets directly |

Reviewer: For the Incremental Value, I would assume it would need everything but R7 depending on its scope.

> | R7: Consumer skill | Medium — orchestrates existing tools | **High** — skills are lightweight | Low — a SKILL.md file | Low — thin wrapper | Medium — Claude Code users only | Needs R1-R3 | Ad hoc prompting |

Reviewer: For the User proximity cell, any AI product could use the skill, not just Claude Code users.

### Prioritisation

**Core (Phase 1):** R1 (dependencies) and R3 (project worksheets) are the clear winners — high value, zero/low maintenance, directly address the most common failure mode across 5+ downstream projects. R2 (coverage) is low effort and complements R1. R4 (discovery) is incremental and can be included opportunistically.

**Defer:** R5 (recommended sets) has the worst value-to-maintenance ratio. The curation problem is unsolved, only 17 of 381 variables are tagged, and bundles are inherently project-specific. Defer until R1-R3 reveal whether standardised bundles are actually useful.

> **Phase 3 only:** R6 (MCP/CLI) and R7 (consumer skill) depend entirely on Phase 1-2 stability. Don't plan details until the R functions are working and the API surface is validated by use.

Reviewer: There's a mismatch between the phases in the this section and the implementation phases.

### Overall assessment: 7/10 — proceed with tight scope

The dependency resolver + project worksheet generator combination addresses a documented, recurring pain point across 5+ downstream projects, with zero ongoing maintenance cost. Phase 1-2 is ~500 lines of R with clear inputs, deterministic outputs, and built-in test cases (225 DerivedVar entries, real downstream projects). The risk is not building the wrong thing — it is over-building. Keep Phase 1-2 tight, ship it, let Phase 3 demand materialise on its own. The ~2,900 annual CRAN downloads indicate a niche but real user base; the primary beneficiaries are big-life-lab's own research pipelines.

## Scope

### In scope

1.  **Dependency resolver** — given target variable(s), resolve the full dependency graph

> 2.  **Coverage checker** — report variable availability by cycle and database type

Reviewer: There is not concept of a cycle within cchsflow, just database. How would you extract the cycle?

3.  **Project worksheet generator** — produce minimal `variables.csv` and `variable_details.csv` for a set of target variables

> 4.  **Variable discovery** — search and filter harmonised variables by domain, type, coverage

Reviewer: By coverage do you mean database?

5.  **Recommended variable sets** — deferred; curated bundles for common research use cases
6.  **MCP and CLI integration** — Phase 3; expose key functions through the cchs-metadata MCP server and CLI
7.  **Consumer skill** — Phase 3; Claude Code skill for researchers using cchsflow in analysis projects

### Out of scope

-   Changes to `rec_with_table()` core processing logic
-   New harmonisation of CCHS variables (covered by existing CEPs)
-   Data access or download tools (PUMF/Master files)
-   Statistical analysis functions

## Requirements

### R1: Dependency resolution

Given one or more target variables, return the complete set of variables needed, in dependency order.

**Inputs:**

-   `target_variables`: character vector of cchsflow variable names
-   `databases`: optional character vector of target databases (e.g., `"cchs2017_2018_p"`)

**Outputs:**

-   Ordered list of variables from leaves (no dependencies) to roots (target variables)
-   For each variable: its direct feeders, whether it's a DerivedVar, and which `Func::` function implements it

> -   Cycle of circular dependencies or missing feeders

Reviewer: I assume these are errors that should be reported? Would also give examples.

**Data source:** `variable_details.csv` — parse `variableStart` for `DerivedVar::[...]` patterns, resolve recursively.

### R2: Coverage checking

Given target variables and target databases, report availability and caveats.

**Inputs:**

-   `variables`: character vector
-   `databases`: character vector (e.g., `c("cchs2001_p", "cchs2017_2018_p")`)

**Outputs:**

-   Matrix: variable x database → available / not available / available with caveats

> -   Caveats: PUMF precision warnings, optional module flags, Master-only indicators

Reviewer: Where do these come from?

-   **Smoking dose-response**: pack_years_der, SMKDSTY_cat3, DHHGAGE_cont, sex
-   **Chronic disease risk factors**: smoking status, BMI, alcohol, physical activity
-   **Demographics baseline**: age, sex, education, income, province

Each bundle specifies target variables; the dependency resolver (R1) handles transitive expansion.

### R6: MCP and CLI integration

Expose R1-R4 through the cchs-metadata MCP server and CLI:

-   `resolve_dependencies(variables)` — returns dependency graph
-   `check_coverage(variables, databases)` — returns coverage matrix
-   `generate_project_worksheets(variables, databases, output_dir)` — generates files

These extend the existing MCP (which handles StatCan source metadata) with cchsflow harmonisation logic.

### R7: Consumer skill

Claude Code skill (`cchsflow-analysis` or `cchsflow-user`) that:

-   Helps researchers find variables for their research question
-   Generates the correct `rec_with_table()` call
-   Warns about coverage gaps and precision caveats
-   Produces project-specific worksheets
-   Explains what harmonisation transforms are applied

> ## Architecture considerations

Reviewer: Would move the content within this section to the Requirements section since that's what it is. No reason to split them.
